*Preface*
The following preface is written by Jack Parkinson

This project is the adapted Prometheus framework with additions made during my MSc thesis (thesis: https://github.com/JakParkinson/Master-s-Thesis/blob/main/final_ku_msc_thesis_2025_JackParkinson%20(4).pdf).
Specifically the additions are:

#### GENIE injection extensibility
There are 2 different ways to simulate with GENIE. The reccomended way is to provide external GENIE ROOT files generated by the user. This allows for the user to chose their specific paramters and cross-sections. The integration code for the gtrac file -> Prometheus method is located in genie_examples/genie_external_root_upgrade.py. The other option is to inject with a 'preset' GENIE gevgen sim at genie_examples/example_genie_full_injection2.py. This method  injects with gevegen and sets the specific arguements found in genie_examples/gevgen_injection.py. If possible use GENIE version 3.04.02.


For more information see Chapter 4 in my MSc thesis.

#### IceCube Upgrade PPC Tables
For new IceCube upgrade tables see resources->PPC_tables->upgrade_tables. These have the effective area table for mDOM, DEgg, DOM and HQE DOM as well as angular response curves, both of which were paramtierzed using the public GEANT4 tool OMSim https://github.com/icecube/OMSim. For more information on these files and how the geometry of the IceCube Upgrade sensors was chosen see Chapter 6 in my MSc thesis.

### Improved Muon Light Yield

Muon light yield is also changed from the following files in the prometheus folder (mainly in lepton_propagation). For more information see Chapter 5 in my MSc thesis.



- loss.py: Added track  length to Loss class
- ppc_photon_propagator.py: Added 0m track length parameter to Loss creation to account for new Loss class type
- new_proposal_lepton_propagator.py: Changed new_proposal_losses() to account for amu- muon loss type. Added debug logging option to verify new loss method works (need to uncomment code block at the top of file). Also added a warning and adjusted Ecut and vcut to reflect ppc parameterisations
- translators.py: Added an amu- loss type
- write_to_f2k.py: Added track length as an input to TR f2k lines


For specific conda env see: environment.yml
GENIE version: 3.04.02
There is also a .sh file in genie_examples called genie_external_root_upgrade.sh which shows you how to run a complete simulation with supplying a gtrac.root file from GENIE.
*End of Preface *

Welcome to Prometheus!

Authors:

1. Jeffrey Lazar
2. Stephan Meighen-Berger
3. Christian Haack
4. David Kim
5. Santiago Giner
6. Carlos Argüelles Delgado


## Table of contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)

2. [Dependencies](#dependencies)

3. [Installation](#installation)

    3.1. [Installation from source](#source)

    3.2. [Using Containers](#containers)

4. [Citation](#citation)

5. [Documentation](#documentation)


## Introduction <a name="introduction"></a>

`Prometheus` is a `Python`-based package for simulating neutrino telescopes. Please see [2304.14526](http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14526) for a detailed description of the package.

## Dependencies <a name="dependencies"></a>

`Prometheus` depends a few external packages, one can either install these manually or download images with the dependencies prebuilt.
We provide details for providing either option here.

## Installation <a name="installation"></a>

To install all of `Prometheus`'s dependencies one has two options: either by downloading and compiling them from `PyPI`or source, or by downloading Docker or Singularity files.

### Installation from source <a name="source"></a>

First, we will discuss the packages which must be compiled from source.

First, we must install `LeptonInjector` which will be used to select neutrino interaction quantities.
The source code for this as well as installation instructions can be found [here](https://github.com/icecube/LeptonInjector).

Next, one may optionally install `PROPOSAL`, which is used to propagate the charged leptons that result from neutrino interactions.
We say this is optional since it can also be installed using the setup script later.
We only mention compiling it from source here because there have occasionally been issues with using `pip` for some operating systems.

Next, if one wishes to simulate ice-based detectors, it is necessary to compile the photon propagation code.
The source code for this can be found in `/resources/PPC_executables/`.
We provide two directories here, one containing code suitable for running on a CPU and one containing CUDA code that can run on a GPU.
Details on compiling them can be found in those directories.
These use a modified version of the official PPC code found [here](https://github.com/icecube/ppc).

Lastly, if one wishes to do event weighting, one must compile `LeptonWeighter`.
The source code and instructions on how to compile it can be found [here](https://github.com/icecube/LeptonWeighter).

After this, one can install all the Python dependencies by running the setup script found in the base directory of the repo, _i.e._ by running `python setup.py install` from the base directory.
There have been some issues with installing `PROPOSAL` via pip.
If this is encoutered, please see instructions for installing from source above.

### Using Containers <a name="containers"></a>

While you can install `Prometheus` manually using the raw code from here, one can also download docker or singularity image with all dependencies prebuilt from: [repo](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1-PbSiZQr0n85g9PrhbHMeURDOA02QUSY?usp=sharing).

Then load the docker image. In the container you will find prometheus under /home/myuser/prometheus . Note you may need to run bash + source /opt/.bashrc before using prometheus.

We also offer a singularity image should you need it in the same [repo](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1-PbSiZQr0n85g9PrhbHMeURDOA02QUSY?usp=sharing), which may be useful for running simulations on a cluster.
This are currently in beta and require some setup:

1. Download the latest .sif file (currently v1.0.2)
2. run ``` singularity shell name_of_file.sif ```
3. enter the /opt folder ```cd /opt ```
4. source the bash file ``` source .bashrc ```
5. clone prometheus from the repository to a folder of your choice. The setup should now be done

Please note, that some systems still use older kernels not compatible with newer boost versions. In such a case use the containers with the "old" keyword.

For GPU usage the repository offers a GPU docker image, which you will need to use to build an image yourself. Then you will also have to compile ppc (using e.g. make gpu in the PPC_CUDA folder) youself. Note that you may change the arch version in the makefile of PPC to do this, depending on your hardware.


## Citation <a name="citation"></a>

Please cite this [software](https://github.com/Harvard-Neutrino/prometheus) using
```
@article{Lazar:2023rol,
    author = {Lazar, Jeffrey and Meighen-Berger, Stephan and Haack, Christian and Kim, David and Giner, Santiago and Arg\"uelles, Carlos A.},
    title = "{Prometheus: An Open-Source Neutrino Telescope Simulation}",
    eprint = "2304.14526",
    archivePrefix = "arXiv",
    primaryClass = "hep-ex",
    month = "4",
    year = "2023"
}
```

And please consider citing the packages that `Prometheus` uses internally, _i.e._ `LeptonInjector`, `PROPOSAL`, `PPC`, and `LeptonWeighter` with the following citations.

```
@article{IceCube:2020tcq,
    author = "Abbasi, R. and others",
    collaboration = "IceCube",
    title = "{LeptonInjector and LeptonWeighter: A neutrino event generator and weighter for neutrino observatories}",
    eprint = "2012.10449",
    archivePrefix = "arXiv",
    primaryClass = "physics.comp-ph",
    doi = "10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108018",
    journal = "Comput. Phys. Commun.",
    volume = "266",
    pages = "108018",
    year = "2021"
}

@article{koehne2013proposal,
  title     = {PROPOSAL: A tool for propagation of charged leptons},
  author    = {Koehne, Jan-Hendrik and
               Frantzen, Katharina and
               Schmitz, Martin and
               Fuchs, Tomasz and
               Rhode, Wolfgang and
               Chirkin, Dmitry and
               Tjus, J Becker},
  journal   = {Computer Physics Communications},
  volume    = {184},
  number    = {9},
  pages     = {2070--2090},
  year      = {2013},
  doi       = {10.1016/j.cpc.2013.04.001}
}

@misc{chirkin2022kpl,
  author = {D. Chirkin},
  title = {ppc},
  year = {2022},
  publisher = {GitHub},
  journal = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/icecube/ppc}},
  commit = {30ea4ada13fbcf996c58a3eb3f0b1358be716fc8}
}
```

## Documentation <a name="documentation"></a>

API documentation can be found in `/documentation`

<!-- ## Installation <a name="installation"></a> -->
